so one of the most important aspects of
natural language processing is
it is related to the study of
linguistics or language so in the next
segment I'm going to go over the basics
of language and language analysis and
linguistics as they relate to this class
so linguistics is the study of language
and it covers many aspects of language
for example its sound system its
syntactic system its use its change over
time let me start now by showing you
some slides that relate to the sounds of
the language so the first chart is the
IPA or international phonetics
association chart of consonants so each
consonant sound can be characterized by
two properties one is the so called
place of articulation which are organs
which portions of organs are used to
produce it and one is the manner of
articulation which is the way in which
the air goes through your mouth and nose
to pronounce that sound so let's look at
some examples the first colon includes
the sounds like poor bird and moon which
are known collectively as by labios
bilabial stands for tulips use both lips
to pronounce pur blue moon you also have
sounds that are pronounced for example
with your soft palate like velar sounds
like cool and good and you also have our
viler
sounds and palatal sounds and uvular
sounds uvula is sounds are pronounced
using the uvula which is this little
portion of your palate all the way in
the back
now the manner of articulation can be
plosive I like you have a flow of air
that suddenly stops when you say it
sounds like pull bird to the Cougar
it can also be nazo if it goes through
the nose like the moon and all sounds
and it can also be fricative if there is
friction when it's pronounced for
example that covers the sounds like Shh
and the third property of consonants is
whether they're voiced or voiceless so
for example in each pair in each box you
have
as many as two different consonants for
example pull and buh
they're pronounced exactly the same way
as far as the place of articulation and
the manner of articulation are concerned
that they differ in whether they are
voiced or not so if you put your finger
on your throat and you try to pronounce
pull and book you will realize that when
you say buh
your vocal cords vibrate and when you
stay put they don't so the same thing
applies to all the pairs of sounds like
- in the current good insurance and so
on now in addition to consonants there
could be vowels and vowels are
characterized by two properties again
one is where they formed in the mouth to
form the back or in the middle and also
whether your mouth is open closed or
somewhere in the middle so for example
the e sound is a front vowel that is
pronounced with a closed relatively
closed mouth whereas R is much more open
than E or a and it's too pronounced in
the front of the mouth and then sounds
like all and who are pronounced in the
back of the mouth so this charge is like
the previous one includes vowel sounds
that are not only in English but in
other languages as well now the other
thing that you want to hear about
linguistics is that languages are
related not all languages are related to
O other languages but many languages are
related to each other so if you look at
this slide here you will see that the
word for night in English is very
similar to words in other languages such
as French and German all the way to
Albania and Latin and Sanskrit they
don't the words don't look exactly the
same but they have the same origin they
come from a language called
proto-indo-european or p IE from which
all of the currently existing
indo-european languages originated so
protein european doesn't exist anymore
yet some of the words in that language
still survive - these days
like in this example so let's just look
at how different they can be might in
English nuit in French knocked in German
not in Russian North in Bulgarian loiter
in Portuguese and Galician not in
Italian no op day in the Romanian
Lochte's in Latvian they all look
relatively different and yet they have
something in common they all have the
form that starts with the letter n
followed by some vowel and then some
specific consonant or pair of consonants
that are somewhat related to each other
so all the words in this category are
known as cognate so cognate is a
terminal linguistic that means that
words have a common ancestry so the
languages in the Europe indo-european
language family that survive to these
days can be grouped into smaller
categories for example Bengali and who
do both descend from Sanskrit Farsi
descends from old Persian and both old
Persian and Sanskrit are part of the so
called indo-iranian group of languages
Greek is descendant of the Hellenic
group of languages Romanian French and
Catalan all descend from Latin which is
a form of an italic language Lithuanian
Russian and polish are all parts of the
balto slavic group of languages more
than English descends from Old English
which is a Germanic language German
descends from old high german which is
another germanic language and so on
there are some newly new european
languages that exist in the world some
of them are even spoken in europe and
nearby countries for example turkish is
unknown in the european language it's
part of the so-called outtake family
Finnish and Hungarian are part of the
pheno Ubik family Arabic and Hebrew are
part of the Semitic family and to cover
the rest of the world there can be also
language families from Africa and
Americas such as Yuto at second which is
spoken in portions of North and Central
America so this chart here
shows you a relative distribution of the
language families in the world it's a
little bit hard to see on the screen but
you can get the original version from
Wikipedia you can see that there are
many different language families and
that they're distributed all over the
world and to give an idea of the
language diversity that exists nowadays
I would like to refer it to a website
called the ethnologue which covers 7300
languages in the world
which are grouped into all those
different families that you can see on
the screen you see some of the families
can be very large for example the
Austronesian family has 1257 languages
those tunisian family of languages are
languages spoken in australia and
islands of the Pacific other large
groups include sino-tibetan languages
which include chinese and related
languages languages from Papua New
Guinea are also very common in fact
Papua New Guinea is one of the places in
the world along with Indonesia that has
the largest number of different
languages another subject that linguists
study is the change of language over
time so I'll give you some examples here
one specific example is Grimm's law
Grimm's law tells you how words in the
wide range of languages changed over the
years in a very systematic way so what
used to be voiceless stops turned into
voiceless fricatives what used to be
voiced stops became voiceless stops and
finally what used to be voiced aspirated
stops I spare that other ones that are
pronounced with an aspiration like those
change to either voiced stops or
fricatives so there are two examples
here so example one shows you how one of
those changes occurred in in a variety
of languages for example the buh sound
that appeared in ancient Greek Latin and
Sanskrit changed into an F sound in
English German and Swedish so the word
foot is listed in all of those examples
the second example is the word for dog
which used to start with a letter K in
Asia
Greek a Latin and even in Welsh nowadays
but it has changed in English Dutch and
German to the sound huh now the good
time to show you a macro problem about
related languages and language cognates
the name of this poem is Owen the family
and it was used in the 2012 contest so
when you have time try to solve this
problem and then on the next slide you
will see a link to the solution so here
is the solution to the problem Oh in the
family which has to deal with related
families of languages and cognates now
going back to the idea of language
change I'm going to show you a very
ancient piece of text and I'm going to
ask you if you can guess the source of
this text the language and its period
you will see the solution on the next
slide well the answer is that this is
new woof which is an epic poem that was
written in the 8th to 11th century in
Old English
now it's a little hard to read the
manuscript so instead what I will do is
show you the text in a way that is
easier to heat the left-hand side of the
slide shows you the text as it appeared
in Old English and the right-hand side
shows you an approximate translation
into modern English you can see that
even though our modern English descended
from Old English it is very different
from it and it's very difficult to
recognize most of the words in Old
English now I should also say that
modern English did not just descend from
Old English it also borrowed many words
from related languages such as French
and German and so on over the years
after that the only word that is easy to
recognize here is still fairly arcane
this is the word first as in erstwhile
in English it means first and that is
highlighted in bold face in the middle
of each of the two texts if you're
interested in how English changed from
old english to modern english you can go
through the list of links at the bottom
of the page
this slide shows you just a few of the
examples of the words that used to exist
in Old English but are not commonly used
these days
in modern English or have changed their
meanings completely for example a set o
s ETTL e used to mean a seat or bench we
nowadays we use the word the verb to
settle but we don't use seto as a noun
and it certainly does not mean seat or
bench so languages in different families
and even languages within the same
family can be very diverse for example
some languages have articles and some
don't
this is why native speakers of Russian
often have a hard time when they speak
English because there is no concept of
an article words like the and are in
Russian so for Russian speakers it can
be sometimes very difficult to say
whether you should say I have an
apartment or I should you should say I
have apartment different languages can
also have cases so a case is an
indication that the word can be used in
different syntactic roles in the
sentence for example in Latin you can
have a sentence like the one shown here
where L of exit where prayer means a boy
puella means girl and the exit is a form
of the verb to vex or to annoy so here
the order of the words in the sentence
is not really important what is more
important is that the first word where
appears in the so called nominative case
which indicates the subject of the
sentence whereas the middle word problem
indicates that puella is in the
accusative case or it's the object of
the verb and finally vex at is the verb
so here by combining all this
information together we know that it is
the boy who is annoying the girl and not
the other way around
in English the only way to express this
is to use word order in Latin you can
replace the order of those words with a
different word order and you will still
get the same semantics because the
meaning of the semantic rules is carried
by
endings of the cases languages can also
differ in their sound systems for
example some languages have what is
known as a glottal stop so this is the
middle sound in R so this is something
that appears in some of the languages
and not in others there are other sounds
that don't exist in English for example
the so called velar fricative they are
articulated with the back of the tongue
of the soft palate so examples of those
sounds include the voiceless velar
fricative which is used in languages
like Russian and The Voice mu which is
used in languages such as modern Greek
both of those don't exist in English
examples in English would include the 2
th sounds the voiceless third and the
voiced the which don't appear in many
other languages and again there that can
be a problem for speakers native
speakers of other languages and that's
why sometimes people make fun of the way
French people speak when they say this
and that because they are not used to
pronouncing the th sound in English
proper languages can also differ in the
way that they refer to people in the
structure of a family for example otto
son in japanese means somebody else's
father and chichi means somebody's own
father this can be very problematic for
an English speaker who goes to Japan and
wants to refer to somebody else's father
as chichi this would be considered rude
or at least a sign that this person is
not a native speaker kinship systems in
general can be very complicated
so English has uncles and aunts and
daughters-in-law and so on but some
languages have more than a hundred
different ways to refer to your
relatives in fact one of the most
complicated kinship systems comes from
the language called warlpiri and this
brings us to the next macro problem by
Alan Chang which is listed on this
website if you go and try to solve this
point on your own you organize that this
language is related to a specific
community of people that has different
castes which can inter marry but then
the descendants of people from the
different
ask and have different names depending
on how many generations have happened
since the intermarriage and the solution
to this problem is here
the next topic in linguistics that I
would like to talk about is the concept
of language universals
so those are properties that are valid
across all languages in the world there
are two types of language universes
unconditional and conditional and I'm
going to go through some of the examples
of those language universes for example
an example of an unconditional language
Universal is that all languages have
both verbs and nouns or that all spoken
languages have both consonants and
vowels there know languages that only
have consonants or languages that only
have ours and then two examples of
conditional language universals they
both come from Greenberg was one of the
founders of the theory of language
universal rule number one on his list is
the following in declarative sentences
those are sentences that end with
periods as opposed to question marks and
exclamation points so in declarative
sentences with the nominal or now
subject an object the dominant order is
always one in which the subject precedes
the object so if the subject and the
object are both nouns then it's much
more common to have the subject we see
the object and who number 29 on
Greenberg's list is if a language has
inflection it must also have derivation
so what do those words mean inflection
deals with the fact that you can change
a word by changing its morphology and
keeping the part of speech for example
if you take the word to sleep sleep and
you change it to sleeps
you are inflecting it for the third
person derivation has to deal with
changing the part of speech of a word by
changing it more its morphology for
example if you take the word of drink
you can which is a noun or verb you can
change it to drinkable which is an
adjective
by adding
a suffix ABL e so to summarize rule
number 29 on Greenberg's list if a
language has inflection
it always has derivation it's a
directional or conditional universe it
doesn't apply in the opposite direction
so one website that I would recommend
for you is Walz the word atlas of
linguistic of language structures it's
available online at Walz dot info it's a
relatively recent project that covers
several hundred languages and almost two
hundred features the features include
things like the order of the object and
the verb it turns out that object
precedes verb in 713 languages in the
database verb precedes objects in 705
cases and 101 languages don't have any
particular dominant order some of the
other features that are covered in this
database are features 18 and 67 so 18 is
the absence of common consulates it
turns out that in the database five
languages have been enumerated as having
no bilabial sounds 49 have nor
fricatives and twelve have no nasals who
number 67 is about the inflection or
future tense let me explain what that
means in English if you won't express
that the certain verb is in the future
tense we need to use an external word
like will or Shou so if I want to say I
sleep now versus I will sleep in the
future I have to add this additional
word I will well other languages for
example French or Latin actually use
inflection on the verb just like we do
inflection in English for plural with S
or third-person for verbs in s in French
for example you can add a specific
ending to the verb to indicate that it
will happen in the future
so based on this feature it turns out
that you can speak languages roughly
evenly in to yes-and-no categories with
about 110 of each some of the other
websites that I will recommend about
world languages include included on this
slide the first one is called ethnologue
it's a very large website that covers
about seven
thousand languages in the world includes
a lot of statistics and examples of
their usage the next site is a very long
list of the number common number words
like 110 100 and so on in many different
languages and then I would like to use
this opportunity to raise the issue of
endangered languages it turns out that
there are many languages in the world
about 7,000 of them but every year a few
dozen of them tend to disappear and by
disappear I mean that the last speakers
of that language either die out or stop
using that language altogether I switch
to a different language if language
extinction continues at this rate in a
hundred years majority of the world's
languages will have died so there's an
effort to save dying languages by
preserving records of them in oral and
written form and also by producing
technology that will help people who
speak there or understand those
languages to continue to use them so
this was the annulled introduction to
linguistics the next section is going to
talk about part of speech